Introduction and abstract

Overview of system
NaK, like any molecule, can vibrate and rotate and can be described by its
rotational and vibrational states.  Upon collision with a perturbing atom,
such as helium or argon, these states can change.  This project was primarily
concerned with collisions where the vibrational state is conserved, but the
rotational state is not, as equation 1 specifies.  
\begin{equation}
He+NaK(v,m,j)\rightarrow He+NaK(v,m',j')
Ar+NaK(v,m,j)\rightarrow Ar+NaK(v,m',j')
\end{equation}
Specifically, the purpose of this investigation was
to explore the physical interpretations of how the quantum numbers that
describe angular momentum change during collision.

In addition to its rotational and vibrational states, NaK can also be described
by its electronic state, of which the set of potential curves are an
expression. The potential curves represent energy as a function of internuclear
separation between sodium and potassium. Both experimental and theoretical
investigations choose one potential curve to study, specifying the electronic
energy level at which the collisions in question take place.

At Lehigh University, the experimental and theoretical investigations have
worked together to form a more complete picture of the collisions in question.

Experimental measurements
Professor Huennekens' experimental group has measured the rate constants of
transitions, which are related to the cross sections.  The rate constants are
proportional to the expectation value of the product of the cross section and
velocity, which can be approximated as the cross sections times the average
velocity.  The cross section is a metric of the likelihood that a particular
transition will occur from one j state to another.  The rate constants average
over all values of the quantum number m.

The experimental group has also measured the fraction of orientation that is
preserved throughout the collisions, removing some of the granularity caused by
averaging over all m values.  Collisions tend to be randomizing processes, so
studying the extent to which orientation is preserved gives a metric of the
extent to which a particular type of collision is actually a randomizing
process.  In a cell environment, such as the system that the experimental group
studies, the angular momenta initially point in all directions and the average
value of m is zero.  In order to measure the change in orientation, the initial
orientation must be nonzero.  The orientation is proportional to the
expectation value of m; physically, it is the extent to which all angular
momenta point in the same direction.

Orientation and introduction of the vector model
The orientation is  related to the geometric relationship between m and j in
the vector model.  The vector model is a way of understanding angular momentum,
where j is the angular momentum vector which precesses around the z axis at
some angle theta.  The quantum number m is the projection of j onto the z axis.
The expectation value of the cosine of theta is the orientation.

Experimental procedure
In order to choose a nonzero orientation for the initial state of the system,
the experimental group excites the system from the ground state to a higher
potential, the A state.  A pump laser that is left circularly polarized
populates the A state's vibrational and rotational states in such a way that
there is a preferential population of large m due to the selection rule imposed
by the laser's polarization.  After the collisions, the probe laser is swept
across a range of frequencies to measure the orientation.

The probe laser is linearly polarized; linear polarization can be expressed as
a superposition of left and right circularly polarized light.  Because of the
initial nonzero orientation of the system, the different circular polarizations
interact with the system differentially.  After interacting with the sample,
the superposition of light that was not absorbed is passed through a linear
polarizer perpendicular to the intial polarization.  If the laser is unchanged,
no signal will pass through the polarizer.  However, because the left and right
circular polarizations were absorbed differently, the superposition after
interacting with the system is no longer perfectly linear but rather
elliptically polarized.  Therefore, whatever signal is detected after the
polarizer is a metric of the final orientation.

Previous results
Experiment and theory tend to agree in their determinations of the rate
constants.  For helium, past work has shown that there is a propensity for the
change in j to be an even number.

It was originally thought that this propensity was related to the strict
selection rule for homonuclear diatomic molecules where no odd delta j
transitions are allowed.  Sodium and potassium are in the same column of the
periodic table, so it was thought that perhaps NaK was approximately
homonuclear, which would explain the propensity.  However, it has been
demonstrated that the propensity for an even delta j depends on the collision
partner, where as behavior of an approximately homonuclear molecule should
depend solely on the molecule.  Some initial experimental results for certain
states in a collision with potassium show no propensity for even delta j at
all.  Unfortunately, theory has large computational requirements, and it is too
computationally expensive to model NaK + K to confirm.

Some mechanism other than approximate homonuclear behavior is affecting the
delta j propensity, so theory and experiment are still investigating and
getting good agreement.

Goal of this project: physical interpretation
The large calculations for the theoretical analysis are used to calculate
B_lambda values.  These values are the discrete probabilities for transferring
a specific amount of angular momentum to the NaK molecule in the transition.
These calculations were done prior to the beginning of the summer.

The goal of this summer's project was to gain a deeper physical understanding
of this angular momentum transition.  Using the vector model facilitated
understanding the relationship between j, j', lambda, and alpha.  The vector
model definition of lambda is a metric of the discrete value of angular
momentum transferred in the collision, or the distance between the tip of the j
vector and the tip of the j' vector.  There are a finite number of discrete
lambda values for a given j->j' transition.  Alpha is the angle between j and
j' and is likewise discrete.

QM analysis
These discrete values 
- take the qm theory a step further to get a more intuitive physical
  interpretation:
    - make alpha continuous for semiclassical approximations

SC analysis
- law of cosines, relate lambda and alpha
    - tipping angle
- instead of summing over lambda, integrate over alpha
- alpha is the tipping angle (remember the vector model)
- B is the distribution of tipping angles

Results of B analysis
- theoretical B lambda and B alpha (difference between discrete and continuous)
- Plotting B vs the tipping angle shows which alphas are most likely
- biggest B's are near small alpha

- helium and argon display similar overall behaviors
- small tipping angles
- argon is bigger

Conclusions of B analysis
- He propensity, not for Ar
    - experimental propensity for helium is much stronger than for argon, which
      could also account for not seeing it
    - newer potential curves may change this for argon
- when expectation value of alpha is big the transitions are less likely
- bigger j's meant less tipping

Cross section vs delta-theta analysis - vector model
- sum over lambda, integrate over alpha and look at the cross sectional
  distribution over delta theta
- back to the vector model: delta theta is not alpha
- unless j, j' are coplanar with each other and the z axis, as seen in picture
- give example where delta theta is zero - CONTRAST WITH PIC

- for a particular alpha, j' can be anywhere on the circle in the picture but
  will tend to rest where theta = theta prime
- even if delta theta is zero, j will not necessarily point in the same
  direction as j prime (in fact this is quite rare)
  
Cross section vs delta-theta analysis - QM
- average delta theta over all possible m/m' transitions
- histogram binned by delta thetas and convolved with a gaussian -
  essentially smoothing the discrete values into a distribution to compare with the semiclassical model

Cross section vs delta-theta analysis - SC
- model that relates delta theta to alpha
- considered all azimuthal phi, given an initial theta, found distribution
  of theta prime
- averaging over continuous distribution of tipping angles
- *integral over the values of alpha allowed by geometry in form for
  Gauss-Chebyshev quadrature of the first kind
- *range of integration is cos(theta+theta') < cos(alpha) <
  cos(theta-theta')
- *y = (cos(alpha)-cos(theta)cos(theta'))/(sin(theta)sin(theta'))

Theta-theta' distribution
- theta to theta prime distribution centers around delta theta = 0
- semiclassical 

Delta-theta distribution
- SC and QM agree really well at large j values
- spike near small delta theta
- delta theta is rarely exactly zero
- SC tends not to work as well at smaller j values

Delta-m distribution
- m to m prime distribution centers around delta m != 0
- as expected
- *quantum mechanical, no smoothing

Conclusions
- theta tends to be conserved, which is consistent with other research in this
  field
- m tends to change in such a way that delta theta is small
- vector model and semiclassical model give good physical interpretations of the
  jm->j'm' transitions

Acknowledgments
- NSF
- Lehigh
- Prof. McSwain
- Computers
- Teri and Kara
- Prof. Huennekens
- Prof. Hickman
