1.
Hi. My name is Ashley Towne and I will be talking about collisions between
sodium potassium and helium or between sodium potassium and argon.

2.
Professor Huennekens' lab runs experiments to study this question, and
Professor Hickman leads the theory group. 
NaK, like any molecule, has vibrational and rotational states.  When it
collides with a perturbing atom, such as helium or argon, its state can change.
Specifically, we have been interested in rotationally inelastic collisions
where there is a transfer of momentum from one j,m state to another but where
its vibrational state remains constant.

3.
In addition to its rotational and vibrational states, NaK is also described by
its electronic state, which gives us a set of potential curves.  Both theory
and experiment focus on a subset of these curves.

Experiment chooses a state to excite the system to by the frequency of the pump
laser and then measures properties of that state by absorption of a probe laser
that excites the system to a higher potential.

4.
The experimental group can measure the cross section of transitions from one
angular momentum state to another. For those of you who have not yet taken a
quantum mechanics class, the cross section is a metric of interaction.
Experiments have also measured the fraction of NaK's orientation that is
preserved after collisions.  This is related to the quantum number m. Typically
in a cell environment – which is what Professor Huennekens uses in his lab – the
orientation of the system is random.  The expectation value of m is zero for
any given j value.  However, experimentalists are able to create an orientation
using polarized lasers, so the expectation value of m is nonzero.

5.
The orientation is a relationship between m and j, which can be described using
the vector model.  If m is on the z axis, the j vector points in some
direction, and the angle between j and m is theta. The j vector precesses
around the z axis but maintains the angle theta unless some interaction causes
it to change.  Taking the expectation value of cosine of theta for a particular
j yields the orientation.

6.
Professor Huennekens' lab uses polarized lasers alter the system so that the
orientation is nonzero.
A pump laser, which is right circularly polarized, excites the system from the
ground state to another state with a particular energy.  On the right, the
potential curves show this transition from the ground state to the A state.
This technique can also yield information about the population of the A state
after excitation.
After the system has undergone collisions, a linearly polarized laser interacts
with the system and then is passed through a polarizer perpendicular to the
initial polarization.  Unless something changes, there will be no signal due to
the nature of polarization.

7.
However, linear polarization can be thought of as a superposition of left and
right circular polarization.
When the right circularly polarized pump laser excites the system, there is a
selection rule that states delta m must be positive one.  This means that the
lower m states are not populated, and there is a net nonzero initial orientation.
After the collisions – which presumably have changed the orientation of the
system – the probe laser uses linear polarization, so that both left and right
circular polarization must interact with the system.
Because of the initial nonzero orientation, the two types of circular
polarization will be absorbed at different rates, and the resulting total
polarization is elliptical.  As it is no longer perfectly linearly polarized,
passing it through the perpendicular polarizer will result in a small signal,
which is related to the orientation of the system.

8.
It is possible to calculate these results theoretically.  Comparing them shows
that there is a propensity for the change in j to be an even number, as shown
by the rate constants in the graph.  The rate constant is related to the cross
section.  One of the original explanations for this was that homonuclear
diatomic molecules have a strict selection rule.  Sodium and potassium are in
the same column of the periodic table; it is possible that they are close
enough to homonuclear to explain this propensity.  However, experiments have
shown that when the perturbing atom is potassium rather than a noble gas, there
is no noticeable propensity for delta j to be even.  Due to computing
constraints, theoretically  modeling potassium has proven to be challenging, so
we can't compare those results, but for helium, the agreement is good.

9.
We can calculate the cross section of interaction using a quantum mechanical
model.  The equation depends on the initial and final states, a few constants,
and the parameter lambda.  Lambda is a metric of how much angular momentum was
transferred in the collision.  In the vector model, it is the distance from the
initial j vector to the final j vector.  Due to the quantum mechanical nature
of the system, lambda must be a discrete value between j minus j prime and j
plus j prime.  The angle between j and j prime is alpha, which also has a
finite number of discrete values.
However, if we remove the quantum mechanical restrictions and make lambda a
continuous variable, we can use a semiclassical model to approximate the cross
sections.

10.
By applying the law of cosines to the triangles on the previous slide, a
relationship between lambda and alpha for a particular j/j prime pair can be
determined.  This relationship can turn a sum over discrete lambda into a
continous integral over alpha.
Alpha is called the tipping angle, and in the semiclassical model, is a metric
of the continuous amount of angular momentum transferred.  Integrating over
alpha gives the cross section of interaction.
The semiclassical equation also depends on a set of constants as well as the
initial and final states.  One of these constants is B, which is the
distribution of tipping angles.

11.
For helium, j is 19, j prime is 21, and delta j is two, this plot shows the
distribution of tipping angles.  Note that the quantum mechanical model (in
red) is multiplied by 2lambda plus one, and the semiclassical model (in blue)
is multiplied by sine alpha. These are the values that were summed or
integrated, so including them leads to no loss of generality and does provide a
scale to see useful trends.

12.
Note that the largest B values are concentrated at small alpha.

13.
Helium's B values were much larger in magnitude for even delta j.  The
distribution was much narrower for even delta j, as well.  As these are the
most probable transitions, we can conclude that there is a propensity for a
small tipping angle.
Argon showed no propensity for even or odd delta j, although for small delta j
(the most probable transitions) there was a propensity for small alpha. At
least, the propensity has not been calculated yet.  The potential surface for
argon is still being refined, so future calculations may show something
different.  As delta j increased, the expected tipping angle grew, but the
magnitude of the B values decreased.
The latter trend was common to both argon and helium.  Argon's B values were
much larger than helium's.  Argon is a bigger atom, so it makes sense that it
is more likely to transfer angular momentum in a collision.  As jbar increased,
the expected tipping angle decreased.  It also makes sense that higher j states
will be less likely to tip as far as lower j states.

14.
Another metric to look at is how the cross section changes with delta theta.
Note that delta theta is not equal to alpha unless j and j prime are coplanar
with each other and the z axis.  J vectors can precess around the z axis.
Theta measures the angle between j and m.  Alpha measures the angle between j
vectors.
The cross section sums over all lambda or alpha possibilities for each j j
prime pair.  The distribution of alpha or lambda is related to delta theta.

15.
A j prime vector with a particular alpha can end up anywhere on the circle
shown in this image.  All points on that circle have the same tipping angle of
alpha, but theta prime changes which yields a distribution of delta thetas
Again, there are two models to compare.  The cross sections for the quantum
mechanical model are delta functions.  To find a meaningful distribution of
delta thetas to compare to the semiclassical model, I put the quantum data into
a histogram binned by delta thetas and convolved it with a gaussian –
essentially smoothing the delta functions into a distribution.
Professor Hickman computed the semiclassical model, initially using a numeric
approach and then refining it to be analytic.

16.
These results show the distribution of cross sections across delta theta
values.  Again, quantum is red and semiclassical is blue.

24.
One of the big conclusions is the delta theta tends to be small.  This is
consistent with what we expected.  However, delta theta is rarely exactly zero,
especially in the quantum mechanical model; there are very few state
transitions that can result in a delta theta of zero.
As delta j increases, the distribution of cross sections tends to spread out.
Interestingly, argon's distribution is narrower than helium's at delta j of 1,
but it spreads out much more quickly as delta j increases.
As jbar increases, the agreement between the quantum and semiclassical models
drastically improves, and the distribution becomes much narrower.

25.
I'd like to acknowledge and thank the NSF for funding this project, XSEDE at
TACC for the hardware that allowed the data to be calculated, and the people
who helped me.
I'd like to thank Teri and Kara for helpful conversations, Professor Huennekens
for explaining the experimental side of the project, and Professor Hickman for
guiding me through the entire process.
